# about-team-fortress-2
## The future of Team Fortress 2's game hosting flow
Team Fortress 2 has an interesting current debate in the community about the game's state on the game populating systems which are in place. Some people have already taken stance about which system is better, is it a match finder (a.k.a Quickplay) or a matchmaker (Meet your Match revamp)? 

I wish to expose my observations in this document to showcase what I have seen and what I think, in my opinion, could be a way to talk a way to finally get to a conclusion before Team Fortress 2's 20th anniversary.
### Team Fortress 2 has had three phases in its lifespan
* **The Orange Box phase (2007-2011)** 
When Team Fortress 2 was released in 2007, the hosting and creation suite that came with the game was the standard one that has always come with Valve games. The dedicated server software, the Hammer map editor and an in-game basic game hosting system. To host games, you needed to port forward your router's firewall and let connections through, not a very straight forward way to host games if you ask me. To join games, you needed to browse the game browser like it is tradition, but times change.
* **The Steam phase (2011-2015)** 
With the game going Free-to-Play, Valve had already developed and polished an inventory system, trading and microtransactions, all these futures were developed and tested with Team Fortress 2 to later be a success in this game and others alike. Around this time, the Steam Community Market and Steam Workshop were being developed and also tested with Team Fortress 2, the market lets users sell their items for Steam wallet cash and the workshop lets the users submit their content to contribute to the game's growing item economy and customization options and to also expand the game's variety of maps. TF2 successfully transititioned to the Steam phase, integrating deeply with its ecosystem and laying the groundwork for future titles to use these systems to enhance their experience. But with time, TF2 started to lag behind Dota 2 and CS:GO, which both featured extensive matchmaking systems that TF2 lacked, having only a match finder system and matchmaking was only reserved for Mann vs Machine, a Co-op alternative gamemode developed by Valve. Still no changes to the traditional hosting system, but now Valve offered their own vanilla Valve hosted servers.
* **The 'Matchmaking' (or modern) phase (2016-now)** 
Using Mann vs Machine as a basis, several people from Valve started teasing and experimenting with a matchmaking ladder system for competitive players on TF2, later, they would start to invite people into the Beta for feedback. This system would inevitably become the Matchmaking we know today in TF2. Originally it was only planned for competitive games, but with the release of Meet your Match it replaced the match finder system with a new mode called Casual which had a lot of technical and game rules problems. These problems would be addressed in the following months and years, culminating in 2018 with the Blue Moon update which was the last update to the Matchmaking system in TF2. Matchmaking in TF2 was very difficult to balance since the game would prioritize balanced matches and new games instead of populating already on-going games. This would result in long queue times and dead games (in which almost no players or no players would populate almost empty games). They also introduced restrictions like inability to change teams or freely join friend games since it was all tied to the Matchmaking system, it seemed like it was just a competitive lite experience in which the game felt static and players had almost no control in their experience. This would also make it difficult for new players to discover and experience the server browser since it was too hidden and difficult to understand in comparison with the new UI. Eventually, community lobbies would start to die out, except for a few communities that survived or thrived in the absence of the old systems. Competitive didn't carry to the matchmaking system since its implementation was highly deficient and didn't meet the criteria for hosting good competitive games and few players meant a broken matchmaking system. All these problems are still present to this day. And the flow of the game's population wasn't the same.
### The systems in place
* **What is a match finder (a.k.a 'Quickplay') system?**
A match finder system is an algorithm that prioritizes the filling of games with players as fast as possible without any regards of skill or game metadata, most of the time considering ping to choose the best server. The match finder will search on the current available lobbies, whether they are player hosted or Valve hosted. Options can customize the destination of your search. Matches in these nature normally have player controlled moderation tools like vote for kicking, vote for scrambling, vote for map time and vote for map change and a human moderator. They are also longer and more dynamic since the players in-game control the game's rules, maps and flow.
* **What is a matchmaker system?**
A matchmaker system is an algorithm that prioritizes balance and new games sacrificing time for quality matches. These algorithms are usually exponential in time and will struggle on high counts of players in the game that needs to be made (they will take exponentially longer times for each player that has to process). Games made through this system tend to be quick and static in nature after the matchmaking process has stopped. Voting is limited and map changes ocurr very frequently according to game rules. Additionally, players  can only join through the matchmaker system, ensuring consistency in the matchmaker decisions. In match finders, players have control. In matchmakers, the game is in charge with limited or none player interaction.
* **What does the game populating system tell us about the game's design?**
As a developer I can choose to obfuscate, hide or ease the paths I want players to take or not take. As of right now, TF2 has it made it very easy to have the matchmaking system choose the game for you, but it has made it harder for the player to choose their lobby or to create one themselves for others to join. Since the path of least resistance is where most of the players are going to be it is easy to control where the player flow goes and right now, that flow isn't going into custom lobbies. In the past, the path of least resistance was a match finder that populated the different custom and official lobbies in the game. Today, the matchmaker system, which essentially only populates official servers, does it poorly.
### Is there a right way to play Team Fortress 2?
So, the question is, why, oh, why are people so nostalgic about a less advanced system like Quickplay?!

Systems like match finders populate player created lobbies as well as official lobbies ensuring player flow goes to everybody (example: Left 4 Dead 2). Even then, most of these systems are bundled with a lobby browser that lets players pick their own games and communities. In the other hand, matchmaking system serve for optimizing game composition and teams, maximizing balance between skill levels and creating a quality match to better player skills and climb up ladders. Matchmaking system usually are the only way to get into these lobbies, with no lobby browser bundled with it. Matchmaking is made for players to get better making challeging games, matchfinding is designed for players to get into games with other players (simple!). Now, I'm not saying that matchmaking is bad, done right it can prove a great way to experience a game and get better on it. However, since Team Fortress 2 offers lots of paths to take (not just the mechanical leveling up, going up the ladder path), why don't we just let every path shine instead of hindering almost all of them in favor of a dried out matchmaker? (Which only leads to one path and it doesn't do a great job doing it).
### Different ways of having fun
* **Customization of characters and personas**
Team Fortress 2 offers a plethora of hats, cosmetics, weapons, rare items to customize your character. You can choose to make funny characters, or serious troublemakers, it's your choice really, whether you want to show off those tournament badges and your trusty rocket launcher with 7238 kills and lots of addons or just be a funny sandwich Heavy.
* **Non-stop dumb fun**
To just join a server and have fun, just do what your heart desires and get yourself into the game. Players have control over their fun and change the game accordingly, changing game rules, server map time, kicking players that are troublesome or changing maps.
* **Tournies and competitive**
People who have gone out of their way to create communities on the tournament side of TF2. Hosting games, the best teams win prizes, creating and balancing maps for their gamemodes and overall offering challenges for people who want to take it a step further in their skill level.
* **Collecting and economy mini-games**
Whether you feel nostalgic about memoribilia in the game or just want to have every single Second Hand Banana in the game, you can do that, collecting rare items are sometimes people's hobbies and moves the economy around.
* **Modifications and custom content**
People can show off their creations, submit them to be added in the game or play custom matches with new characters, maps or even new gamemodes like Slender Fortress, TF2Ware, FF2, The Hidden, Prop Hunt and so much more!
### The updates evidence something must be done
Big changes throughout Team Fortress 2's update history evidence that a different flow of hosting and playing official and player-made content through System has been in the works passively at least since 2015, replacing the old traditional Orange Box system of downloading, hosting and playing custom or official content. This would be happening in parallel with the updates transforming Team Fortress 2's system of game populating (leading from 2011's match finder system (a.k.a Quickplay) into the Meet your Match til' the Blue Moon's matchamking updates that reworked these systems).
* **June 2, 2015's update - Maps Workshop Beta**
Valve announces the Maps Workshop Beta for Team Fortress 2. This system lets user submit their maps to share with others or download custom maps to play with your friends. Originally, to download custom content you needed to configure FastDL through HTTP for the Source Dedicated Server software package. With the Maps Workshop system, people can add workshop maps that they have subscribed to through Steam to their map rotation, making clients download maps automatically through their Steam client whenever they need to and thus, lifting the weight from the hoster to the workshop system for hosting of custom content. However, for the longest time, this would only package maps and no other modifications or add-ons to the game, making it quite poor in comparison to the Sourcemod and FastDL ecosystem that would become essential in the hosting of custom gamemodes and content in Team Fortress 2.
* **September 16, 2021's update - Steam Datagram Relay**
Changes were made to the untouched and unused by then SDR system ported from the Dota 2 suite to Team Fortress 2. This system enhances various network features for Steam connections and Steam servers (like protection from DDoS attacks, IP faking and routing, and P2P connections). Only Dota 2 and Counter-Strike: Global Offensive were using these systems in place for the longest time. These update wouldn't announce any major changes on SDR and instead silently talked about it in a later update on October 27, in which SDR was announced as "being on limited testing". Allegedly, `-enablefakeip` would let a user host a game through Steam Sockets, but it wasn't a well known fact and it wasn't exposed in the game's options or GUI.
* **December 1, 2022's update - VScript**
Seven years later, Valve backports Left 4 Dead 2's VScript virtual machine to the Team Fortress 2's Source branch, and later to the Source 2013 Multiplayer branch's games. VScript lets players package complex custom-made game functions that interact with exposed game logic variables, flags and rules to create modified game experiencies on their maps and thus, making it possible to create custom gamemodes for maps and packaging them into workshop submitions for people to download and even Valve to add officially into the game (example: VSH). In short, custom assets and code can be packaged into the map files and submitted to the workshop for downloading, hosting and playing.
* **February 18, 2025's update - Steam Networking**
Accompanying the release of the TF2 SDK was the addition of Steam Networking, essentially announcing SDR is out of Beta for Team Fortress 2. Steam Networking lets players create games, on the old Source host server menu, using Steam Sockets so that other people can freely connect without having to port forward your router for Team Fortress 2 client connections. TL;DR, you can now freely host games without any tampering of your network configurations and invite your friends through your Steam friend list. This change also made it so that servers through the Steam Network are listed through the community server browser.
* **May 13, 2025's update - Steam Networking update**
A later update would let players decide a privacy level for their hosted games on the host server menu, exposing a never before seen "Friends-Only mode" for listened games. This would make it possible to host private games for your friends only. Other options include "Public (Unlisted)", "Public (Listed)" and "Private".
### The path to move forward
These updates, when bundled, expose a very interesting view about how Team Fortress 2's in-game experience is being tinkered with to enable: the packaging of custom maps and game modifications through the workshop for easy access, the hosting of games through Steam Networking for easy joining and inviting through Steam and the ability to create new experiences and play them with friends without being a major PITA. 

However, there's still loose ends that harden the experience of this flow in the game, like major VGUI2 components for browsing custom gamemodes or at least redirecting to the workshop for downloading of these custom maps  and gamemodes, more advanced options for hosting games like saving of custom map rotations, tournament settings and bot options, a new lobby browser for browsing active games and most importantly, a new match finder system.

With all said, it's still great to see good integration with the Steam ecosystem and the enabling of these features says a lot about what we can wait for this game to come.
### What does the future has in store for us?
Team Fortress 2 is done. Or is it? Well, we don't really know for sure. But what we do know is that the game is broken in a lot of aspects and we can steer it to get to a point where we can let it go do its thing. Does TF2 still have a lot of potential? Yes, it does. But will it ever be attained to the max? I don't know, it's up to Valve really.

The systems and updates evidence that we can be near a future of TF2 where players rule and make TF2 their canvas for their favorite gamemodes and experiences, where everybody can shine and have fun. For now, TF2 is alright, and just needs some polishing. We can wait for TF3, I guess...
